The money supply is like the air inside a balloon while prices are like the rubber of balloon itself. The act of adding more air into the balloon is "inflating the balloon." Removing air from the balloon is "deflating the balloon." Under normal conditions, inflating the balloon makes the balloon get bigger while deflating the balloon makes the balloon get smaller.
There are also other factors that affect the size of the balloon.
We can make the balloon smaller by putting it under water; the deeper the balloon goes, the smaller the balloon gets because the outside pressure squeezes the balloon more and more.
We can make the balloon smaller by putting it in the freezer; as the air in the balloon cools down, the pressure of the air outside the balloon squeezes the balloon smaller.
Even though the amount of air inside the balloon remains constant, modifying temperature or pressure changes the size of the balloon in simple and predictable ways consistently across the entire balloon.
Because of technological advancement and human progress in general, the temperature has been decreasing while the pressure outside the balloon has been increasing. Both factors are contributing to the decrease in balloon size. This is good and natural.
In this analogy, the government cannot control the temperature or pressure. They have two tools available to them: they can add more air into the balloon (inflating the balloon) and they can squeeze the balloon with their hands. And they sure have been using these tools.
The natural outside pressure keeps increasing and squeezing the balloon (prices) smaller. The government adds more air into the balloon, which can have any of three effects. If the government adds air into the balloon at a modest rate, prices will decrease, but at an unnaturally low rate. The government could add air into the balloon at just the right rate such that prices remain constant even though they are adding more air into the balloon (inflation). But they have chosen the third option of adding air into the balloon such that the balloon's size increases despite the affects of increasing external pressure squeezing the balloon more and more.
The government figured out that if the balloon increases in size slowly enough, people don't seem to care and just accept this as how the world works. But this isn't quite good enough because the government benefits from putting air into the balloon.
Every once in a while a crisis comes along that the government can solve or exploit by adding air into the balloon. But this doesn't affect all parts of the balloon the same way. See, the government is also pinching and squeezing the balloon in such a way as to help control prices for their friends or in ways that benefit them politically.
Because of this, the balloon is a distorted mess with some parts being compressed small while other parts of the balloon grow even more than they naturally would.
Some people see that prices in their part of the balloon are getting bigger and want the government to squeeze their part of the balloon.
Some people can see how distorted the balloon is and want the government to stop squeezing other parts of the balloon.
Some people see more air going into the balloon and want that to stop.
I think classical liberal or libertarian (with a small L, not Libertarian) would want the squeezing and inflation to stop.
How does Bitcoin fit into this analogy? Is Bitcoin a needle? I think this is where the analogy breaks down. Maybe Bitcoin is a steel ball inside the balloon, unaffected by its surroundings. I know this analogy could be better. I wanted to get my basic thoughts out and just freestyled it.
